1. Introduction
The term “creativity” comes from Latin, and means “give birth to” or “bring into 
existence” (cf. Cicero Omnes res, quas et creat natura, et tuetur “All things, which 
nature makes as well as protects”). However, the act of creation was not available 
to humans; only gods and nature could create something or someone. The idea 
that man can be creative is a fairly recent one, and probably not much older 
than a thousand years. Yet, the term is now both widespread and ill-defined. 
Does it refer to the creation of something new, valuable, or worthwhile? The 
combination of hitherto unconnected elements? The flling or using of already 
existing patterns in skillful ways? Is there creation out of nothing, ex nihilo, as the 
romanticist would have it? What did Ezra Pound mean with his smashing 1934 
slogan: Make it new?
In a very influential study, Dean Simonton (2012) defined creativity as originality 
times appropriateness (cf. Thomas Hoffmann, 2018). So, ideas need to be both 
new (original) and appropriate in a given situation to be truly “creative”. Singing 
“Happy Birthday” at somebody’s birthday party is highly appropriate, but hardly 
original, and therefore not creative. Singing Pharell Williams’s song “Happy” at 
the dying bed of a beloved person is highly original, but hardly appropriate, and 
so it is not creative either, according to this defnition. When Vincenzo Bellini 
and Felice Romani created Norma as their masterpiece in the novel combination 
of “gothic romanticism” with elements of classic tragedy, this innovation was 
both highly original and very appropriate, and so can be considered an act of 
creativity, according to Simonton.
The present paper is concerned with creativity in language and linguistics. Can 
language users be creative, and if so, how? How do we model linguistic creativity 
in our theoretical models? At first sight, language as a rule-based system should 
not allow for any innovations, for any creativity in the common sense. After all, 
computers and their programs cannot be creative either. Yet, we see what can only 
be termed “acts of creation in speakers”, in both everyday and poetic language. 
Speakers produce new words and new metaphors apparently without thinking, and poets create works such as Finegan’s Wake. How is this possible? How do hearers and readers deal with the unexpected and surprising input?
2. Deﬁning Linguistic Creativity
Today, the term “creativity” has wide currency in linguistics. Noam Chomsky was 
not the first one to discuss the concept, but maybe one of the most widely read:
“Within traditional linguistic theory, furthermore, it was clearly under-
stood that one of the qualities that all languages have in common is 
their “creative” aspect. thus an essential property of language is that it 
provides the means for expressing indefinitely many thoughts and for  
reacting appropriately in an indefinite range of new situations.” 
(Chomsky, 1965, p. 6)
“Language is a process of free creation; its laws and principles are fixed, but 
the manner in which the principles of generation are used is free and infinitely varied. Even the interpretation and use of words involves a process of free creation.” (Chomsky, 2003, p. 402)
