The crisis engulfing This Morning deepened tonight with claims the show was 'toxic' behind the scenes.

The fallout from Phillip Schofield's affair with a much younger colleague widened as the host's former lover claimed he had not been quizzed about it by ITV, despite the company insisting an investigation involving both men took place.

Calls for an independent inquiry into the scandal gathered pace, with ITV's most senior bosses under increasing pressure to admit what they knew and when about Schofield's relationship.

And tonight Dr Ranj Singh, who was a regular guest on This Morning, accused the show of having a 'toxic' culture of bullying and discrimination.

The TV doctor said he had taken his concerns to 'the top' of ITV but felt he had been 'managed out' as he was dropped from screens, raising yet more questions for executives. He had worked on the show for ten years and had even previously co-hosted it. He left in 2021.

A weekend of revelations, sparked by Schofield making an apology to the Daily Mail on Friday for lying about the affair, added to pressure on the channel's chief executive Dame Carolyn McCall and her director of television, Kevin Lygo, to address the growing controversy.

It can also be revealed that the ex-lover has vowed to not lie about the relationship, which Schofield described as 'unwise but not illegal' but has left his 38-year TV career in tatters.

Sources told the Mail the former production assistant insists that 'he was never asked' about the romance, while another ITV insider said: 'Everybody just knew about it.'

One source said: 'It's time for some truths to be told now, this has been brushed under the carpet for so long and it has to come to an end. The younger man has got to the point now where he won't lie for anyone but actually, he says he was never asked by ITV about any relationship.

'It is time that people were held to account, or at the very least explain themselves.'

An ITV spokesman tonight stood firm, saying: 'Both parties were questioned.'

But the network refused to say when the questioning took place, or who conducted it.

Yesterday Mr Lygo told Sky News 'no mistakes' were made as his channel sought out the truth.

The assistant was shunted from This Morning to another ITV programme in 2020 after he admitted his love for Schofield at an awards ceremony – prompting much gossip among employees of all levels that there was a relationship between them.

Insiders say that the move between programmes would have almost certainly been overseen by ITV's head of daytime, Emma Gormley. She has yet to comment.

Richard Scorer, of lawyers Slater and Gordon, said that while all the details of the relationship were not yet known, 'any situation where a young person may have been subjected to a potential imbalance of abuse of power needs to be investigated fully and independently'.

The abuse specialist added that the long-standing rumours about the affair – and the allegations that others in ITV were aware of the relationship – meant it was 'imperative that there is a full and transparent investigation'.

Ex-Culture Secretary Nadine Dorries joined the calls for an independent investigation.

She told the BBC's Sunday With Laura Kuenssberg: 'We know that there were complaints lodged with ITV over a long period of time. What happened to those complaints? I think the editor of the programme, Martin Frizell, has some questions to answer himself.

'How did that young boy, so young, get a job at ITV? What were the processes involved? What was the safeguarding in place for someone so young at that age? What contact was first made? Who contacted who?'

