At the introduction level, which is the primary step to grammar learning, the foremost  attention is paid to 
book materials, tables, rules and structures. Here the educators are apt to explain the rules, their usage and check 
the understanding and basic use of the definite grammar aspect. It seems there is no room for creativity at this 
prime  stage,  considered  mostly as  teacher-centered.  Yet  I  have  proved  it is  possible  to  escape  from  some 
standard ways of checking students’ comprehension by exploiting some creative activities. 
1. Role exchange  
After introducing a definite grammar part (e.g. tenses, modals) I ask the learners to take the role of a teacher 
and by using the board and board pens to explain it to me and their peers. They are provided with some creative 
ideas of using the  board, or  handouts, or digital tools.  Surely, they need to have their own impact on it. As a 
result, they present the covered grammar material in a variety of ways starting just with drawing tables, time 
lines on the board, using colorful pens, creating slides by emphasizing key points, presenting jumbled parts to be 
matched  by  their  mates  in  groups  and  so  forth.  This  role  exchange  activity  helps  to  free  the  classroom 
atmosphere  from  monotonous  mood,  stimulates  students’  collaboration  and  improves  grammar  material 
acquisition, which also proves to be a quite student-centered approach. 
At the stage of memorization, which is regarded as the most repetitive and exasperating phase and the whole 
process is followed by revising rules, remembering some exceptions and completing tasks. Definitely, it turns to 
be rather discouraging and educators face greater than ever absence of interest and frequent grammar mistakes 
both in written and oral discourse. The creative technique that I have implemented is the following: 
2. Two in One 
The process of revision and memorization of some rules and patterns can be encouraged if students in groups 
of  3-4  are  given  an assignment  to  create  some  tasks  referring  to  a  specific  grammar  aspect  (e.g. articles, 
pronouns, prepositions). The activities can vary from Multiple choices to Gap filling. On task preparation phase 
they spend 20 minutes, then the groups exchange the tasks and complete them in 10 minutes. After finishing, the 
tasks are checked by the group which created them. At the end, the common mistakes are written on the board 
and discussed. 
The activity seems both  challenging and exciting because it helps students  to interact, to experience self-
sufficiency  and  start  thinking  critically.  Here  two roles  are  combined,  since  students  act  as  educators  and 
learners.  By  creating  tasks  they  use  their  knowledge,  they  recall  examples  from  book  resources  and  by 
completing the tasks they check their understanding. 
At the implementation level, which is the highest point of the pyramid, learners need to be quite confident to 
use the grammar rules and patterns accurately and appropriately. In this phase of language acquisition we can 
use a  range of creative  activities, like Picture  description, Anecdotes,  Paraphrasing, 1-minute  pitches, etc. I 
would present one of the activities used by me rather effectively. 
3. Mini-logues  
Students, either in pairs or groups, are given a task to compose a mini dialogue focusing on a grammar issue, 
like Question types, Relative clauses, Conditionals. This activity is focused mainly on the use of entire grammar 
with  irregular  forms  and  exceptions.  Mini-logues  should  be  situational  and  consist  of  at  least  150  words. 
Situations are provided by the educator in a form of authentic pictures/scenes cut from current newspapers, or 
some short background information (e.g. A woman calls Kids Café and wants to get information about the menu, 
party services and pricing. Dialogue is between the woman and the receptionist, later the party organizer). 
Such activities give a huge platform for the learners to present their grammar skills in question formation and 
answering, usage of several tenses, collocations, modals, etc. In creating conversation models they are enabled to 
take possession of the foreign language, make it their own, enhance imagination and implement it in a real-life 
context. 
