Clock alarms tinkled faintly. The courthouse clock boomed. Birds leaped from trees like a net thrown by his hand, singing. Douglas, conducting an orchestra, pointed to the eastern sky.
The sun began to rise.
He folded his arms and smiled a magician’s smile. Yes, sir, he thought, everyone jumps, everyone runs when I yell. It’ll be a fine season.
He gave the town a last snap of his fingers.

Doors slammed open; people stepped out.

Summer 1928 began.

Crossing the lawn that morning, Douglas Spaulding broke a spider web with his face. A single invisible line on the air touched his brow and snapped without a sound.

So, with the subtlest of incidents, he knew that this day was going to be different. It would be different also, because, as his father explained, driving Douglas and his ten-year-old brother Tom out of town toward the country, there were some days compounded completely of odor, nothing but the world blowing in one nostril and out the other. And some days, he went on, were days of hearing every trump and trill of the universe. Some days were good for tasting and some for touching. And some days were good for all the senses at once. This day now, he nodded, smelled as if a great and nameless orchard had grown up overnight beyond the hills to fill the entire visible land with its warm freshness. The air felt like rain, but there were no clouds. Momentarily, a stranger might laugh off in the woods, but there was silence …
Douglas watched the traveling land. He smelled no orchards and sensed no rain, for without apple trees or clouds he knew neither could exist. And as for that stranger laughing deep in the woods …?

Yet the fact remained – Douglas shivered – this, without reason, was a special day.

The car stopped at the very center of the quiet forest.

‘All right, boys, behave.’

They had been jostling elbows.

‘Yes, sir.’

They climbed out, carrying the blue tin pails away from the lonely dirt road into the smell of fallen rain.

‘Look for bees,’ said Father. ‘Bees hang around grapes like boys around kitchens. Doug?’

Douglas looked up suddenly.

‘You’re off a million miles,’ said Father. ‘Look alive. Walk with us.’

‘Yes, sir.’

And they walked through the forest, Father very tall, Douglas moving in his shadow, and Tom, very small, trotting in his brother’s shade. They came to a little rise and looked ahead. Here, here, did they see? Father pointed. Here was where the big summer-quiet winds lived and passed in the green depths, like ghost whales, unseen.

Douglas looked quickly, saw nothing, and felt put upon by his father who, like Grandpa, lived on riddles. But … But, still … Douglas paused and listened.

Yes, something’s going to happen, he thought, I know it!

‘Here’s maidenhair fern,’ Dad walked, the tin pail belling in his fist. ‘Feel this?’ He scuffed the earth. ‘A million years of good rich leafmold laid down. Think of the autumns that got by to make this.’

‘Boy, I walk like an Indian,’ said Tom. ‘Not a sound.’

Douglas felt but did not feel the deep loam, listening, watchful. We’re surrounded! he thought. It’ll happen! What? He stopped. Come out, wherever you are, whatever you are! he cried silently.
