The weather has finally started to get warmer in the UK which is always a reason to celebrate. Though most of us enjoy spending our day out in the sun, the heat can make us feel uncomfortable when we’re trying to sleep.

Given that the UK is going through a mini heat-wave, Martin Seeley, the CEO and sleep expert at MattressNextDay has explained why people are likely to get poor sleep this week and how we can prevent that happening.

Why do we struggle to sleep when it’s hot?
For starters, the heat and humidity can make it hard to fall asleep at night which can lead to a night of tossing, turning, sweating, and, therefore, a lack of high-quality sleep.

“Secondly, you may find that the excitement of longer and warmer days has led to you forgetting to prioritise sleep,” Seeley explains.

Sunny weather can be a rarity in the U.K so when the warm weather arrives you suddenly feel a new sense of optimism about the number of things you can complete in a single day.

“However, if you’re not logging seven or eight hours of sleep per night, then you’ll slowly start to feel the consequences of sleep deprivation, which will ironically make you feel anti-social, after socialising so much,” Seely says.

He suggests that we try not to spread ourselves too thin and prioritise sleep if we’re feeling an afternoon slump. For most of us, the sun means going down to the pub garden to have a couple of drinks. But, all those beers can impact your sleep.

“You should make sure to stop consuming alcohol within three hours of your bedtime,” Seeley says.

“Although alcohol can make feel sleepy due to its sedative properties and, therefore, make you fall asleep more quickly, your quality of sleep that night will be lower, and you’ll feel excessive daytime sleepiness the following date,” he adds.

To create a comfortable sleeping environment, you should keep your bedroom between 16 to 18°C. But, you can use a fan to achieve this lower temperature or if you feel yourself heating up.

Here are other ways you can achieve a cooler sleeping environment.

1. Put your hot water in the freezer for 15 minutes before you go to bed

If you feel hot at night, fill your hot water bottle up with cold water and put it in the freezer an hour before you plan on going to bed. However, be careful as it turns out that frozen water can damage the material of many hot water bottles – meaning the next time you were to hot water to it, it could burst.

Or, if you don’t own a hot water bottle, put your pillowcase in the freezer for 15 minutes before you plan on hitting the hay.

2. When you brush your teeth, run your wrists under cold water

When you brush your teeth before bed, you should also run your wrists under cold water for a few minutes before bedtime, as this quickly cools your body down.

3. Keep your bedroom’s blinds and curtains shut all-day

Naturally, the sun tends to be the hottest throughout the day so you should keep your blinds and curtains shut throughout the day, to prevent the sun from coming in. This should keep your bedroom cooler a night-time when it’s time to fall asleep.
